\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\pdfinfoomitdate=1
\pdftrailerid{}
\usepackage{amsmath, amssymb}

\begin{document}

\section*{Math 505, 1/9}

We continue with the setup from last time: $L$ is a finite Galois
extension of a field $K$ with Galois group $G$. We head towards the {\sl
  Galois correspondence}, which establishes a bijection between
subfields of $L$ containing $K$ and subgroups of $G$. Let $L'$ be such a
subfield. Then $L$, as the splitting field of some polynomial $p$ over
$K$ with no multiple roots, continues to be the splitting field of the
same $p$ over $L'$, so that $L$ is Galois over $L'$. We have seen that
any $\alpha\in L'$ with $\alpha\notin K$ is a root of some nonlinear
polynomial $q$ over $K'$, all of whose roots lie in $L$ and are
conjugate to $\alpha$ under a $K$-automorphism of $L$. It follows that
we can recover $K'$ as the set of all $x\in L$ fixed by Aut$_(K',L)$,
and this group is a subgroup $H$ of $G=$Aut$_K(L)$. Hence {\sl the
  subfields $L'$ of $L$ containing $K$ all take the form $L^H = \{x\in
  L: hx = x, h\in H\}$; in particular, there are only finitely many of
  them}. The same result holds even if $L$ is only a finite separable
extension of $K$, for then $L$ lies in a finite Galois extension $M$ of
$K$ (the splitting field of a suitable product of polynomials over $K$,
one for each element of a $K$-basis of $L$). Now we want to see that
there are {\sl exactly} as many subfields $L'$ as subgroups of $G$ if
$L$ is Galois; we will prove this in steps, deriving other results
interesting in their own right along the way. We first show that $L$ is
a {\sl simple} extension of $K$, generated by a single element $\alpha$.
To see this, note first that it is immediate if $K$ and $L$ are finite,
for then the multiplicative group $L^*$ is cyclic (as you will prove in
homework this week) and a generator also generates $L$ as an extension
of $K$. If $K$ is infinite and $\alpha_1,\alpha_2\in L$, then the
subfield $L'=K(\alpha_1,\alpha_2)$ of $L$ generated by $K$ and
$\alpha_1,\alpha_2$ has only finitely many fields between it and $K$, so
there are distinct $c,d\in K$ with $K(\alpha_1+c\alpha_2) =
K(\alpha_1+d(\alpha_2)$; this forces $(d-c)\alpha_2,\alpha_2$, and
$\alpha_1$ to lie in $K(\alpha_1+c\alpha_2)$, so that the single element
$\alpha_1+c\alpha_2$ generates $L'=K(\alpha_1,\alpha_2)$. Iterating this
result with a finite basis $\ell_1,\ldots,\ell_n$ of $L$ as a $K$-vector
space, we see that a suitable linear combination of the $\ell_i$
generates $L$ as an extension of $K$, as claimed. Now let $E$ be any
field and $H$ any finite group of automorphisms (not assumed to be
$F'$-automorphisms for any particular subfield $F$ of $E$ for the
moment). If $\alpha\in E$ and if $\alpha=\alpha_1,\ldots,\alpha_m$ are
the distinct conjugates of $\alpha$ by the elements of $H$, then
$\alpha$ is a root of the polynomial $(x-\alpha_1)\cdots(x-\alpha_m)$,
whose roots are distinct and whose coefficients are fixed by $H$. It
follows that $E$ is a separable algebraic extension of the fixed field
$E^H$ and any subfield of $E$ containing $E^H$ and generated by finitely
many elements and $E^H$ is in fact generated by only one element and
$E^H$, and that element satisfies a polynomial of degree at most $|H|$.
But then the degree of $E$ over $E^H$ must be finite and at most $|H|$
(lest some subfield of $E$ have too large a degree over $E^H$), whence
the degree of $E$ over $E^H$ must be exactly $|H|$, since any finite
extension of a field $F$ admits at most as many $F$-automorphisms as its
degree over $F$. We have shown that {\sl given any field $E$ and a
  finite group $H$ of automorphisms of it, $E$ is always Galois over the
  fixed field $E^H$, it has degree $|H|$ over this fixed field, and $H$
  is in fact the Galois group of $E$ over $E^H$}. Returning to our
original setting of a finite Galois extension $L$ of a field $K$ with
Galois group $G$, we now know that {\sl the map sending a subgroup $H$
  of $G$ to the subfield $L^H$ sets up a 1-1 inclusion-reversing
  correspondence between subfields of $L$ containing $K$ and subgroups
  of $G$}. This is the Galois correspondence. Note that $L$ is always
Galois over any intermediate field $L^H$, with Galois group $H$, a
subgroup of $G$.

In the Galois correspondence conjugate subgroups $H,xHx^{-1}$ of $G$
correspond to conjugate subfields $L',xL'$. Hence a subfield $L'$ is
preserved by the group $G$ (i.e. its elements are permuted but not
necessarily fixed by $G$) if and only if its corresponding subgroup $H$
is normal in $G$; in this case the Galois group of $L'$ over $K$ is the
quotient group $G/H$.. Historically the notion of a normal extension of
a field preceded that of a normal subgroup of a group; the first person
to define the notion of normal subgroup (before the axioms of a group
had even been written down) was Galois himself.

As a simple example of the Galois correspondence, look at the subfield
$K=\mathbf Q(\sqrt{2},\sqrt{3})$ of $\mathbf C$ generated by $\mathbf Q$
and $\sqrt{2},\sqrt{3}$. This extension is Galois; the elements of the
Galois group $\mathbf Z_2\times\mathbf Z_2$ each preserve or interchange
$\sqrt{2},-\sqrt{2}$ and the same for $\sqrt{3},-\sqrt{3}$. This group
is well known to have three (not two) subgroups of order 2;
correspondingly, there are exactly three fields strictly between
$\mathbf Q$ and $K$, namely the "obvious" ones $\mathbf
Q(\sqrt{2}),\mathbf Q(\sqrt(3)$, and $\mathbf Q(\sqrt{6})$, It would be
tricky (and quite awkward) to show this directly without using Galois
theory.

\end{document}
