\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\pdfinfoomitdate=1
\pdftrailerid{}
\usepackage{amsmath, amssymb}

\begin{document}

\section*{Math 505, 1/13}

Picking up where we left off last time, we ask when a polynomial $p$
over a field $K$ is {\sl solvable by radicals}; that is, when the
splitting field $L$ of $p$ lies inside the last field $K_n$ of a
sequence of extensions $K=K_0\subset K_1\subset\cdots\subset K_n$ such
that each $K_i = K_{i-1}(\alpha_i)$ with $\alpha_i^{n_i}=\beta_i\in
K_{i-1}$ for some positive integer $n_i$. (We do not assume that $K_i$
is Galois over $K_{i-1}$, nor do we make any a priori assumption about
the degrees $n_i$.) Suppose that there is such a chain of fields $K_i$
for $p$ and let $N$ be the product of the integers $n_i$. We now extend
the field $L$ slightly, letting $K_0'$ be the splitting field of $x^N -
1$ over $K_0$ and inductively letting $K_i'$ be the splitting field of
$x^{n_i} - \beta_i$ over $K_{i-1}'$. Then $K_i'$ is Galois over
$K_{i-1}'$ for $i>0$ and its Galois group is a subgroup of $\mathbf
Z_{n_i}$, since any $K_{i-1}'$-automorphism of $K_i'$ is determined by
what it does to $\alpha_i$, and the only choices are to send it to
$\alpha_i$ times some $n_i$th root of 1 in $K_{i-1}'$. It follows that
$K_i'$ is Galois over $K_{i-1}'$ with cyclic Galois group if $i>0$,
while $K_0'$ is Galois over $K_0$ with abelian Galois group. Since a
finite abelian group is a direct product of cyclic groups, we may
replace the field $K_0'$ by a chain of fields ending in $K_0'$ such that
each field is Galois over the previous one with cyclic Galois group. The
upshot is that some extension $L'$ of $L$ is the last field in a chain
of fields beginning with $K_0$, with each field a cyclic Galois
extension of the previous one. Applying the Galois correspondence and
recalling that the map from subgroups of the Galois group to
intermediate fields is inclusion-reversing, we deduce that there is a
decreasing chain of subgroups $G_0 > G_1 >\,\ldots\,> G_n = 1$ with
$G_0$ the Galois group of $L'$ over $K$, each $G_i$ normal in $G_{i-1}$,
and each quotient group $G_{i-1}/G_i$ cyclic. The existence of such a
chain for a fixed group $G_0$ is of course a purely group-theoretic one
on $G_0$; amazingly, Galois managed to formulate it and show its
equivalence (in his setting) to solvability by radicals *before* the
notion of an abstract group had been introduced! We express this
condition by calling the group $G_0$ {\sl solvable}; nowadays most
students see it for the first time in a group theory course, but Galois
introduced it precisely to characterize the conditions under which a
polynomial is solvable by radicals over $\mathbf Q$. An easy formal
consequence of the definition is that any quotient of a solvable group
is again solvable; applying this observation to the splitting field $L$
of our original polynomial $p$ over $K$, we see that {\sl if a
  polynomial over a field is solvable by radicals, then the Galois group
  of its splitting field must be solvable}. This is half of the famous
Galois Criterion.

Over fields $K$ of characteristic 0, the converse half of the Galois
Criterion holds as well: {\sl a polynomial $p$ over $K$ is solvable by
  radicals if and only if the Galois group of its splitting field is
  solvable}. Before proving this, we take time out to exhibit an example
of a quintic polynomial over $\mathbf Q$ that is not solvable by
radicals. Take $p= x^5 - 4x + 2$. An easy calculus computation show that
$p$ has exactly three real roots (one negative and two positive).
Amazingly enough, this property alone is enough to identify the Galois
group $G$ of (the splitting field $S$ of) $p$: it is the symmetric group
$S_5$! To prove this note first that $S$ is generated over $\mathbf Q$
by the five roots of $p$ in $\mathbf C$, so any element of $G$ permutes
these roots and is in turn determined by how it permutes them. Now $p$
is irreducible over $\mathbf Q$ (by the Eisenstein Criterion), so the
degree of $S$ over $\mathbf Q$ must be a multiple of the degree 5 of any
of the roots of $p$ over $\mathbf Q$. It follows that $G$ contains an
element of order 5 in $S_5$, which must be a 5-cycle (since 5 is prime).
We also know that complex conjugation is an automorphism of $S$ lying in
$G$, which fixed 3 of the roots and flips the other two. Taking a
suitable power of the 5-cycle, we may label the roots $r_1,\ldots,r_5$
in such a way that two elements of $S_5$ lying in $G$ are the 5-cycle
$(r_1, r_2,\ldots,r_5)$ and the transposition $(r_1,r_2)$. Conjugating
the transposition by the 5-cycle we get that the transpositions
$(r_2,r_3),(r_3,r_4),(r_4,r_5)$ all lie in $G$. But now a standard fact
from a first course on group theory is that transpositions of adjacent
indices $(r_1,r_2),\ldots,(r_{n-1},r_n)$ generate all of $S_n$ for any
$n$. We conclude that $S$ has the maximum possible degree of 120 over
$\mathbf Q$ and that $G$ is all of $S_5$, as claimed. Note that it would
be essentially impossible to prove this using field theory alone; note
also, more generally, that any irreducible polynomial of prime degree
$q$ over $\mathbf Q$ with exactly $q-2$ real roots has Galois group
$S_q$ over $\mathbf Q$.

Since the only normal subgroups of $S_5$ are 1, the alternating group
$A_5$, and $S_5$ itself, we deduce that {\sl no} algebraic expression
involving only rational numbers, arithmetic operations, and $n$th roots
(for any $n$) can represent a root of $p$, for if one such expression
did represent a root of $p$, than all other roots could be gotten from
the same expression by making different choices of roots at some step,
so that $p$ would be solvable by radicals over $\mathbf Q$. It is not
difficult (though I will probably not take the time to do it) given any
$n\ge5$ (prime or not) to write down a polynomial of degree $n$ over
$\mathbf Q$ with Galois group $S_n$: no such polynomial is solvable by
radicals over $\mathbf Q$.

\end{document}
