\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath, amssymb}

\begin{document}

\section*{Math 505, 1/11}

We now look at a particularly important example of a Galois extension of
$\mathbf Q$, namely a {\sl cyclotomic extension} $C_n = \mathbf
Q(e^{2\pi i/n})$ for some $n$. This is the splitting field of the
polynomial $x^n - 1$ over $\mathbf Q$, since the roots of $x^n - 1$ are
clearly the powers of $\alpha_n = e^{2\pi i/n}$. We begin by recalling
that $x^n - 1$ is the product of the {\sl cyclotomic polynomials}
$\Phi_d(x)$ as $d$ runs over the positive divisors of $n$, where
$\Phi_d(x)$ the unique monic polynomial whose roots are exactly the
primitive $d$th roots of 1 in $\mathbf C$. It follows easily by (strong)
induction on $n$ that $\Phi_n(x)$ is a monic polynomial with integer
coefficients; its degree is $\phi(n)$, the number of positive integers
less than $n$ and relatively prime to it, or equivalently the order of
the multiplicative group $\mathbf Z_n^*$ of units in $\mathbf Z_n$. The
main result is that {\sl $\Phi_n(x)$ is irreducible in $\mathbf Z[x]$
  for any n}. To prove this suppose for a contradiction that $\Phi_n(x)$
factors as $f(x) g(x)$ where $f(x),g(x)$ are monic with integer
coefficients, $g(x)\ne1$, and $f(x)$ is irreducible. Then every one of
the $\phi(n)$ primitive $n$th roots of 1 in $\mathbf C$ is a root of
$f(x)$ or $g(x)$ but not both, whence there is a prime number $p$ no
dividing $n$ and a primitive $n$th root $\alpha$ of 1 such that $\alpha$
is a root of $f(x)$ while $\alpha^p$ is a root of $g(x)$. By
irreducibility $f(x)$ must then divide $g(x^p)$ in $\mathbf Z[x]$, since
both of these polynomials have $\alpha$ as a root; denoting by $\bar
f(x),\bar g(x)$ the respective reductions of $f(x),g(x)$ modulo $p$, we
get that $\bar f(x)$ divides $\bar g(x^p) = (\bar g(x))^p$ in $\mathbf
Z_p[x]$. But then $x^n - 1$ would have to have a repeated root in its
splitting field over $\mathbf Z_p$ (since both $\bar f(x),\bar g(x)$
divide $x^n - 1$ in $\mathbf Z_p[x]$); this is a contradiction, since
the derivative $nx^{n-1}$ of $x^n - 1$ clearly has no roots in common
with $x^n - 1$ over any field. Now we know that all the powers $e^{2\pi
  i m/n}$ of $e^{2\pi i/n}$ are roots of the same irreducible polynomial
$\Phi_n(x)$ over $\mathbf Z$ or $\mathbf Q$, as $m$ runs over the
elements of $\mathbf Z_n^*$; it follows for any such $m$ that there is a
unique automorphism of $C_n$ sending $\alpha_n$ to $\alpha_n^m$, so that
the Galois group of $C_n$ over $\mathbf Q$ is exactly $U_n = \mathbf
Z_n^*$; in particular, it is abelian (and cyclic if $n$ is prime, or a
power of an odd prime). More generally, the splitting field of $x^n - 1$
over any field of characteristic not dividing $n$ is a subgroup
(possibly proper) of $U_n$ and so is abelian.

It follows for any $n$ that any field $K$ between $\mathbf Q$ and $C_n$
that is Galois over $\mathbf Q$ has an abelian Galois group (being a
quotient of $U_n$). It is a remarkable fact that the converse holds:
{\sl any finite abelian extension of $\mathbf Q$, that is any finite
  Galois extension of $\mathbf Q$ with abelian Galois group, lies in
  $C_n$ for some $n$}. This result, called the Kronecker-Weber Theorem,
at first sight seems flatly impossible: if for example $p$ is a prime
number, how can the quadratic extension $\mathbf Q(\sqrt{p})$ of
$\mathbf Q$, with Galois group $\mathbf Z_2$, lie in any $C_n$? In fact,
a fairly simple direct calculation shows that it lies in $C_{4p}$;
extending this, it is not difficult to show directly that any quadratic
extension of $\mathbf Q$ indeed lies in a cyclotomic extension. Now
suppose that $p$ is an odd prime number of the form $2^m + 1$ for some
$m$; it then turns out that $m$ must itself be a power of 2, and in fact
the there are only five known examples, corresponding to the values
$m=1,2,4,8,16$. Then the cyclotomic extension $C_p$ has degree $\phi(p)
= p-1 = 2^m$ over $\mathbf Q$ and its Galois group is cyclic of this
order. There is an obvious descending chain of subgroups starting from
$U_p$ and ending at 1, each having index 2 in its predecessor; applying
the Galois correspondence we get an inreasing chain of fields starting
at $\mathbf Q$ and ending at $C_p$ with each a quadratic extension of
its predecessor. The quadratic formula then guarantees that each field
can be obtained from its predecessor by adjoining a single square root.
But now there is a simple geometric construction which starts from a
line segment of a specified length $a$ and constructs one of length
$\sqrt{a}$ using only straightedge and compass; in a similar manner,
starting with a given point $a+bi$ in the complex plane (together with
the origin $0 = 0 + 0i$) and using only straightedge and compass, one
can construct a second point $c+di$ with $(c+di)^2 = a+bi$. The upshot
is that {\sl the complex number $e^{2\pi i/p}$, or equivalently a
  regular $p$-gon inscribed in a unit circle, can be constructed using
  only compass and straightedge for any such $p$}. It was Gauss's
discovery of this fact (for $p=17$) that convinced him to go into
mathematics as a profession. More recently a rather anal-retentive
German professor by the name of Hermes wrote a manuscript for how this
could be done explicitly for $p = 65537$, the largest known prime of the
form $2^m + 1$. This took ten years to produce and the manuscript is
carefully preserved under glass in G\"ottingen today.

More generally (and more interestingly) one could ask for which $n$ is
there a formula for the roots of any polynomial over $\mathbf Q$ of
degree $n$ using only rational numbers, $m$th roots (for any $m$, not
just $m\le n$), and field operations. We will see that such a formula
exists for $n=3$ or 4, but not any higher $n$; the proof will use the
simplicity of the alternating group $A_n$ for any $n\ge5$.

\end{document}
